= Running EMC2

== Invoking EMC2

After installation, EMC2 starts just like any other piece of 
Linux software: run it from the terminal by issuing the command 
`emc`, or select it in the Applications > CNC menu.

== Configuration Selector

By default, the Configuration Selector dialog is shown when you 
first run EMC2. Your own personalized configurations are shown at 
the top of the list, followed by sample configurations. Since 
each sample configuration is for a different type of hardware 
interface, some will not run without the hardware installed. The 
configurations listed under the category "sim" run entirely 
without attached hardware.

.EMC2 Configuration Selector[[cap:EMC2-Configuration-Selector]]

image::images/configuration-selector.png[]

Click any of the listed configurations to display specific 
information about it. Double-click a configuration or click OK to 
start the configuration. Select "Create Desktop Shortcut" and 
then click OK to add an icon on the Ubuntu desktop to directly 
launch this configuration without showing the Configuration 
Selector screen.

If you select a configuration from the Sample Configurations 
section, you will be asked to copy the configuration to a 
location in your home directory. It is safe to say "yes" to this 
prompt. If you say "no", EMC2 may start but will behave 
strangely--for instance, offsets entered with Touch Off will be 
cleared unexpectedly. This is because the files are read only if 
you don't save a copy to your home directory.

.Copy Configuration Dialog

image::images/copy-configuration.png[]

== Next steps in configuration

After finding the sample configuration that uses the same 
interface hardware as your machine, and saving a copy to your 
home directory you can customize it according to the details of 
your machine. Refer to the Integrator Manual for topics on 
configuration.

