= Tool Compensation

== Tool Length Offsets

=== Touch Off (((Touch Off)))

Using the Touch Off Screen in the AXIS interface you can update the
tool table automatically.

Typical steps for updating the tool table:

 . After homing load a tool with "TnM6" where "n" is the tool number. 
 .  Move tool to an extablished point using a gauge or take a test cut and
   measure.
 . Select "Tool Table" in the Coordinate System drop down box.
 . Enter the gauge or measured dimension and select OK.

The Tool Table will be changed with the correct Z length to make the
DRO display the correct Z position and a G43 command will be issued so
the new tool Z length will be in effect. Tool table touch off is only
available when a tool is loaded with "TnM6".

.Touch Off Tool Table[[cap:Touch-Off-Tool]]

image::images/ToolTable-TouchOff.png[]

=== Using G10 L1

The G10 L1x command can be used to set tool table offsets:
  (these are just quick summaries, see the Gcode section for full details)

G10 L1  P(tool no.) - Set offset(s) to a value. Current position irrelevant. 
                      (see <<sec:G10-L1->> for details)(((G10 L1)))

G10 L10 P(tool no.) - Set offset(s) so current position w/ fixture 1-8 becomes a value. 
                      (see <<sec:G10-L10->> for details)(((G10 L10)))

G10 L11 P(tool no.) - Set offset(s) so current position w/ fixture 9 becomes a value. 
                      (see <<sec:G10-L11->> for details)(((G10 L11)))

== Tool Table

The "Tool Table" is a text file that contains information about each
tool. The file is located in the same directory as your configuration
and is called "tool.tbl". The tools might be in a tool changer or just
changed manually. The file can be edited with a text editor or be
updated using G10 L1. See the Lathe Specifics Section for lathe tool
table example. The maximum number of entries in the tool table is 56.
The maximum tool and pocket number is 99999.

=== Tool Table Format

.Tool Table Format[[cap:Tool-Table-Format]](((Tool-Table-Format)))

[width="100%", options="header"]
|========================================
|T# |P#  |X  |Y  |Z  |A  |B  |C  |U  |V  |W  |Dia |FA |BA |Ori |Rem
|;  |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |    |   |   |    |
|T1 |P17 |X0 |Y0 |Z0 |A0 |B0 |C0 |U0 |V0 |W0 |D0  |I0 |J0 |Q0  |;rem
|T2 |P5  |X0 |Y0 |Z0 |A0 |B0 |C0 |U0 |V0 |W0 |D0  |I0 |J0 |Q0  |;rem
|T3 |P12 |X0 |Y0 |Z0 |A0 |B0 |C0 |U0 |V0 |W0 |D0  |I0 |J0 |Q0  |;rem
|========================================

In general new tool table line format is:

 - ; - opening semicolon, no data
 - T - integer tool number 
 - P - integer pocket number 
 - D - float tool diameter 
 - X..W - float tool length offset on specified axis 
 - I - float front angle (lathe tools) 
 - J - float back angle (lathe tools) 
 - Q - int tool orientation (lathe) 
 - ; - beginning of comment or remark

=== Tool Changers

EMC supports three types of tool changers: "manual", "random location"
and "fixed location". Information about configuring an EMC tool changer
is in the Integrators Manual.

==== Manual Tool Changer

Manual tool changer (you change the tool by hand) is treated like a
fixed location tool changer and the P number is ignored. Using the
manual tool changer only makes sense if you have tool holders that
remain with the tool (Cat, NMTB, Kwik Switch etc.) when changed thus
preserving the location of the tool to the spindle. Machines with R-8
or router collet type tool holders do not preserve the location of the
tool and the manual tool changer should not be used.

==== Fixed Location Tool Changers

Fixed location tool changers always return the tools to a 
fixed position in the tool changer. This would also include 
designs like lathe turrets. When EMC is configured for a fixed
location tool changer the "P" number is ignored (but read, preserved
and rewritten) by EMC, so you can use P for any bookkeeping number you
want.

==== Random Location Tool Changers

Random location tool changers swap the tool in the spindle with the
one in the changer. With this type of tool changer the tool will 
always be in a different pocket after a tool change. When a tool is
changed EMC rewrites the pocket number to keep track of where the tools 
are. T can be any number but P must be a number that makes sense for
the machine.

== Cutter Radius Compensation [[sec:Cutter-Radius-Compensation]]

Cutter Radius Compensation allows the programmer to program the tool
path without knowing the exact tool diameter. The only caveat is the
programmer must program the lead in move to be at least as long as the
largest tool radius that might be used.

There are two possible paths the cutter can take while cutter radius
compensation is on to the left or right side of a line when facing the
direction of cutter motion from behind the cutter. To visualize this
imagine you were standing on the part walking behind the tool as it
progresses across the part. G41 is your left side of the line and G42
is the right side of the line.

The end point of each move depends on the next move. If the next move
creates an outside corner the move will be to the end point of the
compensated cut line. If the next move creates in an inside corner the
move will stop short so to not gouge the part. The following figure
shows how the compensated move will stop at different points depending
on the next move.

.Compensation End Point[[cap:Compensation-End-Point]]

image::images/comp-path.png[]

=== Overview

==== Tool Table

Cutter radius compensation uses the data from the tool table to
determine the offset needed. The data can be set at run time with G10
L1.

==== Programming Entry Moves

Any move that is long enough to perform the compensation will work as
the entry move. The minimum lenght is the cutter radius. This can be a
rapid move above the work piece. If several rapid moves are issued
after a G41/42 only the last one will move the tool to the compensated
position.

In the following figure you can see that the entry move is compensated
to the right of the line. This puts the center of the tool to the right
of X0 in this case. If you were to program a profile and the end is at
X0 the resulting profile would leave a bump due to the offset of the
entry move.

.Entry Move[[cap:Entry-Move]]

image::images/comp02.png[]

==== Z Motion

Z axis motion may take place while the contour is being followed in
the XY plane. Portions of the contour may be skipped by retracting the
Z axis above the part and by extending the Z-axis at the next start
point.

==== Rapid Moves

Rapid moves may be programed while compensation is turned on.

==== Good Practices

 - Start a program with G40 to make sure compensation is off.

=== Examples

==== Outside Profile

.Outside Profile[[cap:Outside-Profile]]

image::images/outside-comp.png[]

==== Inside Profile

.Inside Profile[[cap:Inside-Profile]]

image::images/inside-comp.png[]

