= About EMC

== The Software

 -  EMC (the Enhanced Machine Control) is a software system for computer
   control of machine tools such as milling machines and lathes.
 -  EMC is free software with open source code. Current versions of EMC
   are entirely licensed under the GNU General Public License and Lesser
   GNU General Public License (GPL and LGPL)
 - EMC provides:
     - a graphical user interface (actually several interfaces to chose
   from)
    -  an interpreter for "G-code" (the RS-274 machine tool programming
      language)
    - a realtime motion planning system with look-ahead
    -  operation of low-level machine electronics such as sensors and motor
      drives
    -  an easy to use "breadboard" layer for quickly creating a unique
      configuration for your machine
    - a software PLC programmable with ladder diagrams
    - easy installation with a Live-CD
 -  It does not provide drawing (CAD - Computer Aided Design) or G-code
   generation from the drawing (CAM - Computer Automated Manufacturing)
   functions.
 -  It can simultaneously move up to 9 axes and supports a variety of
   interfaces.
 -  The control can operate true servos (analog or PWM) with the feedback
   loop closed by the EMC software at the computer, or open loop with
   "step-servos" or stepper motors.
 -  Motion control features include: cutter radius and length
   compensation, path deviation limited to a specified tolerance, lathe
   threading, synchronized axis motion, adaptive feedrate, operator feed
   override, and constant velocity control.
 -  Support for non-Cartesian motion systems is provided via custom
   kinematics modules. Available architectures include hexapods (Stewart
   platforms and similar concepts) and systems with rotary joints to
   provide motion such as PUMA or SCARA robots.
 - EMC runs on Linux using real time extensions. 

== The Operating System

Ubuntu has been chosen, because it fits perfectly into the Open Source
views of EMC2:

 -  Ubuntu will always be free of charge, and there is no extra fee for
   the "enterprise edition", we make our very best work available to
   everyone on the same Free terms.
 -  EMC is paired with the LTS versions of Ubuntu which provide support
   and security fixes from the Ubuntu team for 3 - 5 years.
 -  Ubuntu uses the very best in translations and accessibility
   infrastructure that the Free Software community has to offer, to make
   Ubuntu usable for as many people as possible.
 -  The Ubuntu community is entirely committed to the principles of free
   software development; we encourage people to use open source software,
   improve it and pass it on.

= Getting Help

== IRC

IRC stands for Internet Relay Chat. It is a live connection to other
EMC users. The EMC IRC channel is #emc on freenode.

The simplest way to get on the IRC is to use the embedded java client
on this page
http://www.linuxcnc.org/content/view/4/8/lang,en/[http://www.linuxcnc.org/content/view/4/8/lang,en/].

Some IRC etiquette:

 -  Ask specific questions... Avoid "Can someone help me?", "It won't run"
   type of questions.
 -  If you're really new to all this, think a bit about your question
   before typing it. Make sure you give enough information so someone can
   solve your question. 
 -  Have some patience when waiting for an answer, sometimes it takes a
   while to formulate an answer or everyone might be busy working or
   something.
 -  Set up your IRC account with your unique name so people will know who
   you are. If you use the java client, use the same name every time you
   log in. This helps people remember who you are and if you have been on
   before many will remember the past discussions which saves time on both
   ends.

=== Sharing Files

The most common way to share files on the IRC is to upload the file to
one of the following or a similar service and paste the link:

    http://pastebin.ca = for text  
    http://imagebin.ca = for pictures 
    http://filebin.ca = for files and pdfs

== Mailing List

An Internet Mailing List is a way to put questions out for everyone on
that list to see and answer at their convenience. You get better
exposure to your questions on a mailing list than on the IRC but
answers take longer. In a nutshell you e-mail a message to the list and
either get daily digests or individual replies back depending on how
you set up your account.

Information about the EMC Users Mailing List at:

https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/emc-users[https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/emc-users]

== EMC Wiki

A Wiki site is a user maintained web site that anyone can add to or
edit.

The user maintained EMC Wiki site contains a wealth of information and
tips at:

http://wiki.linuxcnc.org/cgi-bin/emcinfo.pl[http://wiki.linuxcnc.org/cgi-bin/emcinfo.pl]

= Get EMC2

== Normal Download

Download the Live CD from:

http://www.linuxcnc.org/[http://www.linuxcnc.org/]

and follow the Download link.

== Multi-session Download (((Multi-session Download)))

If the file is too large to download in one session because of a bad
or slow Internet connection use `wget` to allow resuming downloads.

=== Wget Linux (((Wget Linux)))

Open a terminal window. In Ubuntu it is
Applications/Accessories/Terminal. Note that actual file names may
change so you might have to go to
http://www.linuxcnc.org/[http://www.linuxcnc.org/] and follow the
Download link to get the actual file name. In most browsers you can
right click on the link and select Copy Link Location or similar then
paste the link into the terminal window with a right mouse click and
select Paste.

To get the Ubuntu 8.04 Hardy Heron version copy this in the terminal
window and press enter:

` wget -r
http://www.linuxcnc.org/hardy/ubuntu-8.04-desktop-emc2-aj07-i386.iso`

To get the Ubuntu 6.06 Dapper Drake version:

` wget -r
http://www.linuxcnc.org/iso/emc2.2.2-1-ubuntu6.06-desktop-i386.iso`

To continue a download that has been stopped add the -c option to wget:

` wget -r -c
http://www.linuxcnc.org/hardy/ubuntu-8.04-desktop-emc2-aj07-i386.iso`

To stop a download use Ctrl-C or close the terminal window.

After the download is complete you will find a new directory called
www.linuxcnc.org or something similar. In the subdirectory under the
above directory you will find the ISO CD image file. Next is burning
the CD.

=== Wget Windows (((Wget Windows)))

The wget program is also available for Windows from

http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/wget.htm

Follow the instructions on the web page for downloading and installing
the windows version of the wget program.

To run wget open a command prompt window.

In most Windows it is Programs/Accessories/Command Prompt

First you have to change to the directory where wget is installed in.

Typically it is in C:\Program Files\GnuWin32\bin so in the Command
Prompt window type:

`cd C:\Program Files\GnuWin32\bin`

and the prompt should change to C:\Program Files\GnuWin32>

Type the wget command into the window and press enter as above.

== Burning the CD

EMC2 is distributed as CD image files, called ISOs. To install EMC2,
you first need to burn the ISO file onto a CD. You need a working
CD/DVD burner and an 80 minute (700 Mb) CD for this. If the CD writing
fails, try writing at a slower burn speed.

=== Burn with Linux

Before burning a CD, it is highly recommended that you verify the md5
sum (hash) of the .iso file.

Open a terminal window. In Ubuntu it is
Applications/Accessories/Terminal.

Change to the directory where the ISO was downloaded to.

`cd download_directory`

The run the md5sum command with the file name you saved.

`md5sum ubuntu-8.04-desktop-emc2-aj07-i386.iso`

The md5sum should print out a single line after calculating the hash.
On slower computers this might take a minute or two.

`91c5abb84386091e0ff056e9ebc40fdb
ubuntu-8.04-desktop-emc2-aj07-i386.iso`

Now compare it to the md5sum on the EMC2 download page.

Burning the ISO to a CD

 .  Insert a blank CD into your burner. A "CD/DVD Creator" or "Choose Disc
   Type" window will pop up. Close this, as we will not be using it.
 . Browse to the downloaded ISO image in the file browser.
 . Right click on the ISO image file and choose Write to Disc.
 .  Select the write speed. If you are burning a Ubuntu Live CD, it is
   recommended that you write at the lowest possible speed.
 . Start the burning process.
 . If a choose a file name for the disc image window pops up just pick OK.

=== Burn with Windows

Before burning a CD, it is highly recommended that you verify the md5
sum (hash) of the .iso file.

Windows does not come with a md5sum program. You will have to download
and install one to check the md5sum. More information can be found at:

https://help.ubuntu.com/community/HowToMD5SUM

Burning the ISO to a CD

 .  Download and install Infra Recorder, a free and open source image
   burning program.
 .  Insert a blank CD in the drive and select Do nothing or Cancel if an
   auto-run dialog pops up.
 . Open Infra Recorder, and select the 'Actions' menu, then 'Burn image'.

== Testing EMC2

With the Live CD in the CD/DVD drive shut down the computer then turn
the computer back on. This will boot the computer from the Live CD.
Once the computer has booted up you can try out EMC2 without installing
it. You can not create custom configurations or modify most system
settings like screen resolution unless you install EMC2.

To try out EMC2 from the Applications/CNC menu pick EMC2. Then select
a sim configuration to try out.

To see if your computer is suitable for software step pulse generation
run the Latency Test as outlined in Section ( <<sub:Latency-Test>>)

== Installing EMC2

If you like what you see, just click the Install icon on the desktop,
answer a few questions (your name, timezone, password) and the install
completes in a few minutes. Make sure you write down the name you used
and the password. Once the install process is complete and you go on
line the update manager will pop up and allow you to upgrade to the
latest stable version of EMC2.

== Axis Interface

The AXIS interface is one of the interfaces to choose from. It can be
configured to add a Virtual Control Panel to customize the interface to
suit your needs. AXIS is the default user interface and is actively
being developed.

image:images/axis_2.3.png[]

== Updates to EMC2 (((Updates to EMC2)))

With the normal install the Update Manager will notify you of updates
to EMC2 when you go on line and allow you to easily upgrade with no
Linux knowledge needed. If you want to upgrade to 10.04 from 8.04 a
clean install from the Live-CD is needed. It is OK to upgrade EMC when
asked to.

Warning: Do not upgrade Ubuntu to a new version (like 8.04 to 8.10) as
it will prevent EMC from running.

== Install Problems

In rare cases you might have to reset the BIOS to default settings if
during the Live CD install it can not recognize the hard drive during
the boot up.

